The Joe Rogan experience. What do you think consciousness is? Yeah.
Do you think consciousness is clearly just a,
a factor of brain tissue and, and energy,
or do you think it's possible that what our brain is,
is something that tunes into consciousness?
Yeah. Um, well, I spend, I've spent some time thinking about this question.
I think it's perhaps the deepest question that faces science or even humanity at
some level. And, um,
my own personal perspective is that consciousness is nothing more
than the choreographed motion of particles in various,
from states inside a loppy gray structure that sits inside this thing that we
call ahead. Do I have any proof for that? No.
Does anybody have any proof for what consciousness is not at all at this moment,
but the history of the reductionist program,
where we've been able to take some of the more spectacular creations that have
a Mer in the world and recognize that they are nothing but
the product of their ingredients and the laws of physics leads me to extrapolate
that idea to the experience of consciousness. Now,
having said that there's a deep puzzle,
it's called the hard problem of consciousness,
which is if electrons I and corks and particles and laws of physics
are all that there is.
And if you buy into the fact that electrons don't have an inner world,
that corks don't have an inner world,
how can it be that by taking a collection of those particles,
you can turn on the lights.
How can a collection of mindless thoughtless particles somehow yield mind,
full experience?
And that's a deep question that science has not yet
answered my own feeling is when we understand the brain better,
that question will evaporate.
We'll look at the brain with our new found understanding.
Maybe it's a hundred years in the making,
maybe a thousand years in the making and will say, aha,
when electrons and corks and protons move in this particular configuration,
one of the byproducts is an inner sensation that we call conscious
experience.
And that to me is the likely answer that we will find,
but there are some very smart, well,
all respected people who go in a very different direction.
There are some who say electrons and protons and corks.
They do have a fundamental pro conscious quality.
They themselves are conscious beings of a sort.
Now it's not like you're gonna have electrons that are crying or arequarks that
are in anguishing.
But if you have a little proto element of conscious experience that is imbued
into a particle, and then you take a lot of the particles and put them together,
the ideas that yields the manifest conscious experience that we're familiar
with, I don't buy into that, but there are people who do, why.
Why do you pick a position? Well, I.
I take a position on this because I guess my view is
you look out at the world and what you do as a physicist is you
move the smallest degree required to explain the
phenomena that you are observing and to move from our
current understanding of the world,
to leapfrog to a place where electrons are conscious and corpsrks are conscious
to me is such a fantastically radical move that I don't consider it
justified to make that move with our current level of understanding,
there was a time back in the 18 hundreds when life itself was so
mystical that people basically said the same kind of thing.
How could a collection of lifeless particles ever come together and yield a
living being? They said that they can't, you have to induce a life force.
You have to inject vitally. You have to inject a life force.
That's what sparks the emergence of life on lifeless particles.
I don't think any serious scientist thinks that today.
I think most serious scientists say yes, life is wonderful.
Life is in some sense, miraculous,
but life is nothing but the particles of nature coming together to yield the
complex molecules of DNA and an RNA, the complex cellular structures,
the cells come together to yield the more complex multicellular organisms.
And that's all that it takes to have something that's alive.
No life force is necessary. That way of thinking about the world has gone away.
And I,
my own feeling is that that kind of progression is gonna for consciousness
today.
It's utterly mysterious how it is that I have this inner voice talking inside my
head,
how it is that I look around the world and I can see the color red and I can,
and I can experience the color red.
I don't just have sensors that can call that red. I mean, an iPhone can do that.
I actually have an inner world where I feel the, that color red.
Where does that come from? Hard to answer that question,
but I think a hundred or a thousand years from now will look back and smile at
how we in this era invested consciousness with such mystical
quality. When in the end,
it's nothing but particles in the laws of physics and that's all there is to it.
Well, what's.
Interesting too, to me, is that as a human being, my,
my thoughts on consciousness are, are very deep and profound. And this, this,
this idea, like what is this thing?
But if I really break it down objectively and animals have some sort of a,
a consciousness, I mean, including they have instincts, right? They,
they try to get away from danger. They try to survive and pro create.
And we developed something far more complex in our ability to express ourselves
in language. And in doing that language,
or during that creation of that language,
we developed all sorts of bizarre concepts.
And we've developed all sorts of different ways to describe feelings and,
and emotions and, and contemplate the future as well. Yeah.
And these things are continually getting more and more complex.
If you go to single celld organisms, work your way up to, you know,
early hoades and then get to human beings.
You just see this ever increasing four of complexity in, in every way.
Yes. And in the way that the things see the world,
of course, it makes sense that there would be more complexity. Right.
But we don't think about that when we think of a perricket,
we don't think of a paraket as being conscious,
but a paraket relatively speaking is far more primitive at
chimpanzee, which is relatively speaking, far more primitive than a human being.
Right. And it's just gonna continue to evolve. Or if we survive,
things will continue to improve due to NA natural selection and yes.
Random mutation and all,
all the other factors and will be something that makes this today
look like primitive the way we look at single cell over S or champs or whatever.
Yeah.
I can. Well, imagine that. Yeah. I mean, because we see, you know,
small changes in DNA, you know, tiny fraction of percent yields,
a radical change in what the being that has, that DNA is able to accomplish.
But at the same time, you, you made reference to psychedelic experiences. Yeah.
And I trust you agree, but tell me if you don't,
that those psychedelic experiences were generated by a slight change in the
chemical makeup of the particles cosing through your brain and your body.
Sometimes not even a change, sometimes a, a lot of them,
the heavier ones are actually produced by the brain. Right.
So, so, so to me, that's a great piece of data
speaks to the fact that all it is is particles and chemicals
coercing through a structure,
because if the mind was somehow external to the physical
makeup and the loss describing it,
then how would the injections say of some kind of foreign substance?
Or as you say,
the brain producing some sort up and said it didn't ordinarily have within its
makeup,
why would that be able to have such radical impact unconscious
experience?
The way I would look at it,
if I was trying to argue against that would be that your eyes and
the, the organs of the human eye are taking in light.
And through that light able to perceive physical objects in the world that they
would not be able to do without light. Yes, there's, it's a,
it's something that allows you to see,
and it allows you to take in depth perception and understand shapes that the
human mind,
and particularly these glands that produce these psychedelic chemicals when
experiencing these goals,
it allows the brain to experience things that might be there all
the time. Yes. But that you cannot perceive with normal human neurochemistry,
it needs to be enhanced, or the levels need to be changed and shifted.
And what's really perplexing about the,
these chemicals is that these chemicals are produced by your brain.
And if you do take these like particularly dimeethyltriptomine, yeah.
Is the most potent of all the psychedelic chemicals. If you take that,
you have these insanely profound visions. Right. Which is, you know,
leads to a lot of people have these religious, spiritual epiphanies.
Have you done anything?
Have you done any psychedelic experiences that you're allowed to talk about?
Yeah. Uh, I, I, I have, uh, what have you, not, not many,
and I'm a complete lightweight in this arena because I hardly drink, you know,
I hardly do anything that puts foreign, uh,
substance into the body mm-hmm <affirmative>. But, um, yeah, I was in a,
I was in Amsterdam. Uh, I, I was, uh,
I was there because I was giving a lecture to the queen of Holland and I gave
the lecture and my wife and I were both there. And after that was over,
we decided to do a little experimenting. Uh,
and for somebody like me who doesn't experiment, um,
I made a mistake <laugh> uh, uh, because, uh, did you eat it well? Well,
well, the first night we went out and we went to one of these coffee bars and,
uh, I guess I can speak about this, you know, I, um, it's legal here. Yeah.
Totally legal. Exactly. You know, I, we, we took the, like the,
the easy way in like the, the, the, the novice mm-hmm <affirmative>, uh,
version. And it did nothing to me at all that first night.
So the next night when we went,
I went right to the bottom of the list where they, it was something,
it was in Dutch or something, but it had like machine guns mm-hmm <affirmative>,
you know, pointed at a brain kind of thing. Oh boy. Yeah. So, so I,
I did that version and it was the most terrifying experience of,
of my life. <laugh> I was gonna say that either, but, um, we were in a club,
we were in a club, all of a sudden the world changed. And,
uh, what started happening is my brain started manufacturing
versions of myself that would converse with me and convince
me that the reality that I was experiencing was real.
And then that version of me would destroy the, at reality.
And the process would start over and over and over again, is.
This something you smoked or you ate, smoked? Yeah. Wow.
Definitely smoked. Um, and again, wow.
I suspect that the impact was because my body has no experience.
Oh, for sure. Oh, you know, and, and so I think that just enhanced the,
the impact and, um, Y Y you know, uh,
it was terrifying. It was utterly,
I was in the hotel room and I was clinging to the bed <laugh>
and, and I actually said to my wife tie me up. Not, not in,
not in any, not, it sounds wrong. I, I meant, I mean,
tie me up cuz I'm like terrified of what I'm gonna do. Right. You know? Wow.
You know, and so instead, you know, she, she called the doctor and I was like,
she was like, afraid, this would be like in the newspaper.
Cause I just like give lecture to the queen, you know? Right. Uh, but you know,
they're so used to Americans getting in over their head yeah.
With this kind of experience.
So it was something that they were completely used to. So, you know, they, they,
they sent up a doctor and, and the doctor basically just gives you sugar.
And my wife knew that this was a, uh,
an extreme circumstance cuz I don't eat any sugar, but I was like, he said,
eat as my, I was like taking the Milky way bars. Like.
I'm so sugar, somehow.
Another counter sugar, some, I don't know,
I don't know the chemistry behind this, but sugar is the,
the antidote caffeine is supposed to help us. Well, caffeine can help too. Yeah,
I guess. But it, it lasted eight hours.
<laugh> even flying home on the plane. The next day,
all I did is I sat on my seat and uh,
I put on the headphones and there was a beetles channel and I just like listened
to beetles perfect for like, for like seven hours. And I, I was just, you know,
in this, in this place that I had never experienced before now, now, you know,
for our conversation, you know,
this just made it so intuitively obvious to me that my
conscious awareness is totally dependent on chemical, on, on a,
on a few chemicals. Right. That's all that's happening inside of the head.
So in a way it was a valuable experience.
It's not something that I want to ever experience again. Absolutely.
But it was something that helped align my intuitive understanding
of what consciousness is with the scientific recognition
that it all relies upon the stuff that's circulating inside of your mind.
Yeah. What's interesting about this, this,
these heavy duty psychedelic experiences,
cuz what you took was by most people's idea. Very mild. Yeah.
But the more profound psychedelic chemicals that are also produced by your
brain, if you just shift that ratio and not by too much,
really you're not talking about even,
you're talking about little small to OSISS of this stuff shift that ratio,
it produces these profound visions is this like ioka type type. Yeah.
Ioka is just an early active version of dethylritoectomy. Okay. Okay.
They figured out how to, you know, your brain,
your gut rather produces monoamian oxidase and it breaks down dethylriptomine
and so they figured out how to combine an Mao a bit with the leaves of another
plant that has the dethylriptamine and I see, but you could take it there,
there there's synthetic versions of it.
But the point is this is something that your brain produces,
your liver produces. We know you, we know it it's produced in the lungs.
It's the body makes it. Yeah. Right. But it's got it's in there,
but then we change the balance, shift the balance.
And all of a sudden you have these incredibly profound visions.
It makes you think like what,
what we have now in terms of our balance and our,
our chemicals must be different than with this fella must have had yes.
Chimpanzee thing.
I.